hello maths fans dr tom crawford here
from the university of oxford
bringing you my mega fave number
this is part of a very special maths
youtuber collaboration
and we want all of you to join in at
home
full details of exactly how to do that
will follow at the end of this
video the rules for selecting your mega
fave number
are actually quite straightforward it
just has to be a number
which is greater than 1 million so you'd
think
being a mathematician i wouldn't have
too much trouble choosing one
uh well you'd be wrong so
most of my favorite numbers are are
pretty small
in fact most of my favorite favorites
are really really
small and so i've kinda sorta maybe
ish cheated a little bit so my
hashtag mega fave number is 6.187
times 10 to the power of 34
also known as 1 divided by
the planck length l p
so the question then becomes well what
is the planck
length the planck length is a candidate
for the smallest possible scale
in the universe about which physicists
can say
something meaningful so i should clarify
at this point in the video this is
purely speculation
we do not know whether a minimum such
length scale
exists but there's a general consensus
amongst physicists
that if indeed there is a smallest
possible length scale in the universe
then the planck length lp
is a very good candidate for being
that length scale now just pause for a
second
to think about what i am saying
if there is a smallest possible length
scale
in the universe that basically means
that the universe
is pixelated credit to george cham and
his brilliant book
we have no idea for this amazing phrase
the universe might be
pixelated now at first this might seem a
little far-fetched
but we know from quantum mechanics
through
heisenberg's uncertainty principle that
we can never know the exact location
of a quantum particle or in other words
there does not exist information about
the particle's location below
some minimum length scale and this
could maybe be a clue
that a smallest meaningful length
exists in our universe so if we run with
this for a moment
and let's suppose we've convinced
ourselves that a smallest length scale
seems plausible
then why should it be the planck length
and to answer this question we actually
consider
some of the most fundamental constants
in all of physics we start with c which
of course represents the speed of
light so c is going to be
the speed of light and being a speed
this will have units equal
to uh distance
over time our next
important physical constant is going to
be h
which is planck's constant and where the
planck length
gets its name so h
which is planck's constant
this appears in quantum mechanics and
you can think of it
as the pixelation of energy
because it talks about the quanta or
packets of energy
which can be absorbed by particles so we
have
planck's constant h and this has
units equal to energy times
time which is mass
length squared time
to the minus one and finally we have g
the universal gravitational constant
which of course appears in newton's law
of gravity
plus einstein's field equations and
various
other places no doubt and this
has units l cubed
m minus 1 t to the minus
2. so we have three of the most
if not the most fundamental constants of
physics the speed of light with units
l t minus one we have
the planck's constant h with the units
mass length squared time minus one
and we have the universal gravitational
constant
which is g and has units l cubed length
cubed
mass to the minus 1 time to the minus 2.
now the magic happens when we try to
combine these three constants
to get a length scale so this is in fact
a scaling analysis on these three
variables
and what we want to do is using our
knowledge of their units
we want to combine them in such a way
that the mass will cancel out
the time will cancel out and we're just
left with a length scale
and that will be our planck length l
p so the first step is going to be to
remove the mass
so we only have mass in h
and in g so if we start
by doing h multiplied by g
let's do it up here then this
using a square brackets to represent
the units h times g the units here
we've got an m and an m minus one so
they will perfectly cancel
and then we're left with l to the five
on top and then we've got
a h times g we've got a t to the minus
one times t to the minus
two so that's t to the minus three
so by multiplying planck's constant and
a universal gravitational constant
we actually get rid of mass from any of
the units
of this hg new constant
now finally we want to get rid of time
and we're going to do this using c
the last remaining constant so c
has l times t to the minus 1. so if we
now
divide by c
to the power of 3
so c cubed on the denominator here
then this will give us on the bottom
l cubed t minus
3 so the powers of time
will perfectly cancel and then we've got
l to the 5 divided by l
cubed so this equals l squared
so we've almost got our length scale
we've got a length scale
squared so the final step is actually
now
to just take the whole thing
to the power of one half and then we
have exactly
a length scale and so our final formula
for the planck length
lp is going to be h
planck's constant times the universal
gravitational constant g divided
by the speed of light cubed all
to the power of one half and this
is what we believe is a very good
candidate
for the smallest length scale in our
universe
now there's no real reason why we have
combined these three
constants as opposed to any others
but you could also argue that these are
in fact the three
most fundamental of the fundamental
constants
in physics we have the speed of light
also known as the speed limit of the
universe
beyond which nothing can travel any
faster we have
planck's constant which you can
interpret as the
pixelation of energy in terms of how
energy is absorbed
and you have the universal gravitational
constant
which of course is everything to do with
gravity
and relativity so we have pretty much
the top three
physical constants and as we've shown
the only way you can combine them using
their units
to get something that has the units of a
length
is in this form so the planck length is
the only way to get a length scale
using these three constants now
we still don't really know what this
number means
we don't really know if it has a meaning
but the fact that it is possible
it is certainly within the realms of
possibility
that this number the planck length is
the smallest meaningful distance in the
universe
is pretty amazing and this is why
1 divided by the planck length to make
it big
1 over lp also known as
6.187 times 10 to the power of
34 is my hashtag
mega fave number thank you everyone for
watching please do remember to subscribe
to my channel if you've enjoyed this
video
and also remember to take part in the
mega fame
numbers collaboration all you have to do
is pick your own favorite number that's
greater than a million
record a video talking about that number
and then if you upload it to youtube
with mega fave numbers
in the title and also use the hashtag
megafave numbers if you do this before
the 2nd of september your video will
automatically
be added to the mega fave numbers
playlist
along with the rest of us i look forward
to seeing what you come up with
see you soon
you